---
title: "local, convenient 2FA - tpm2 + fido"
categories:
  - linux
tags:
  - security
  - tpm 2.0
---

# Two-Factor Authentication using your machine's tpm module

_Two-Factor Authentication_, also called _2FA_, _multi-factor authentication_
or _MFA_, is a great way to protect digital assets against unauthorized
access.

If you want to authenticate yourself against a digital system, you have to
provide some kind proof of your identity, backing your claim that you are who
you are. These proofs of your identity are called _factor_.

Simple authentication usually relies on _one factor_, usually on the knowledge
of a secret that is hard to guess, e.g. a _password_. Checking and providing
this factor is the easiest to implement and provide, as it does not require
additional hardware systems and complicated trust relationships.

Other factors usually are based on checking a unique _physical property_ of the
user or verifying the _ownership_ of something that is hard to copy.

Physical property checks can be fingerprint or iris scans, facial biometric
features or something similar.

Assets to prove ownership of for the authentication against digital systems can
be mobile phones, e.g. providing proof with one-time codes received via text
message or automated calls, or TOTP tokens. An other class of thing that can be
used to prove ownership of are _security tokens_.

These security tokens consist of a _hardware security module_, which stores a
generated secret, is trusted by the digital system (read: hard to copy, only
accessible with physical possession), and can communicate with the digital
system.

Most hardware tokens communicate either via USB, NFC, bluetooth or smart card
readers and can be accessed from several devices. Which also means that I have
to pull it out of my pocket and connect it to the device I am currently using
in order to authenticate.

Now, if I am using _my own device_, e.g. _my laptop_ (a device that is crucial
to me, that I keep well protected and under close scrutiny), wouldn't it be
nice if I could somehow prove my ownership of this device as second factor?

In short: yes, we can use the trusted platform module (tpm), built into most
modern laptops as hardware token, and with it provide proof of ownership of our
device as second factor.

## Software solution: tpm-fido

As stated by the project's [readme](https://github.com/psanford/tpm-fido/blob/main/Readme.md)

[tpm-fido](https://github.com/psanford/tpm-fido) is a FIDO token implementation
for Linux that protects the token keys by using your system's TPM. tpm-fido
uses Linux's [uhid](https://github.com/psanford/uhid) facility to emulate a USB
HID device so that it is properly detected by browsers.

### Installation

Assuming you have `golang` set up on your machine, simply run

```bash
go install github.com/psanford/tpm-fido@latest
```

### Setup

`tpm-fido` needs permissions to access `/dev/tpmrm0`, provided by being a
member of the `tss` group.

```bash
sudo usermod -a -G tss username
```

The user also needs access to virtual devices created by the `uhid` kernel
subsystem, configured with a `udev` rule.

Assuming the user is a member of `plugdev`, create a udev rule at
`/etc/udev/rules.d/90-uhid.rules`

```text
KERNEL=="uhid", SUBSYSTEM=="misc", GROUP="plugdev", MODE="0660"
```

After a reboot, you can use your tpm as security token in your local browsers
by running `tpm-fido`.

`tpm-fido` can also be started in the background before it is accessed for
maximum comfort. Access to it requires additional user interaction with a little
click.
